The Joe Rogan experience.
Is there any evolutionary benefit to narcissism?
Like where does that come from? Cause does it,
does it exist in the animal kingdom?
Yes. Um,
so if you think about it from an evolutionary perspective,
which some people have narcissism seems to be really good for short-term
mating success.
Like if I go to a bar in downtown Austin and I give narcissism questionnaires to
all the dudes there,
the higher scores are going to get the most numbers over time.
That's usually what happens.
So narcissism is usually good for short-term mating and it's good for status
seeking power seeking.
So it's probably beneficial in those contexts and it's,
and this is where it gets a little weird because in stable environment,
like on research and hunter gatherer societies and stable environments,
if somebody's, you know,
cheating on other people's wives or stealing stuff or steals extra food,
people don't like that. They'll just kill them. I mean,
they'll just go have a hunting accident. If you're in,
if you're kind of the Dick and the, in the, uh, hunter gatherer society,
it'll take you out and you'll just,
won't come back because they just don't want you. Right. But, um,
so narcissism gets, uh, gets weeded out in those places.
But when things get unstable and things, you know,
uncertain people who are narcissistic can get a lot of resources and do really
well. So sometimes they do well, just keeps it around.
And obviously in big societies,
you can become powerful enough to hire henchmen and hire a PR agent.
And you can kind of build your own status and,
and do a lot more than you can in a hunter gatherer group where everyone.
Knows you, what is narcissism when you define it? Like, what is the,
what is your definition of Narcan? So.
It gets a little more complicated when we're talking like this,
I'm talking about grandiose narcissism and that's a basic,
yeah, it's, I'll step back. So when we talk about narcissism,
um, in the, in the psychological literature,
we're talking about three different things that are related.
The first of these is narcissistic personality, and this is a trait.
And meaning that people go from a high level to a low level,
it's not a clinical disorder. And then this trait, when it's grandiose,
we say grandiose narcissism,
it's this combination of sense of entitlement and a sense of superiority,
but also you get extroversion and drive and ambition,
call it a agentic extroversion.
So somebody who is driven and extroverted,
but also a little bit self-centered and antagonistic and entitled.
So that combination of traits, um,
kind of a pre-Madonna or, you know,
overconfident or cocky or whatever you want to call it.
That's what we talk about is grandiose narcissism. And that's just a,
like I said, normal trait, um, there's another form of narcissism,
which we don't talk about as much in the normal world,
but that's vulnerable narcissism.
And these are folks that are kind of think they're really important.
Think they should be in a lot of attention.
Think they're the smartest people in the room, but no one really looks at them.
No one pays attention to them. So they get insecure, they get depressed,
their self-esteem drops. They think, you know,
why aren't I getting the attention I deserved? I'm kind of a legend. Um,
you know, so legend in their own minds. You know,
since I bet it's like basement narcissists, you know,
living in their mom's basement,
thinking how great they are and fantasizing about it.
And those more vulnerable folks, you don't see it,
the bars as much because they're in the basement,
but you see them clinically because they're depressed and they go see a
clinician and say, help me out. I'm anxious.
So those are the two normal forms of narcissism they're traits.
And then there's this clinical form or psychiatric form called narcissistic
personality disorder, NPD.
And that personality form of NAR personality disorder form of narcissism is an
extreme form of narcissism. We have a high level of it, you know, like Trump or,
you know, a lot of paleo celebrities or, you know, academics. Um,
but you also to make it a clinical disorder,
you have to have that impairment we're talking about.
So it has to be clinically significant impairment.
And that's usually the narcissism is so bad. Your,
your marriage or your relationships are falling apart.
Your work life could be falling apart. So sometimes you find narcissistic, uh,
really successful people in offices who are narcissists, but they,
they kind of destroy the office culture. They're just bad workers. Um,
and so you can destroy that.
You can make really poor decisions because your ego is so big. You just,
you know, invest in something and, and it just doesn't work out for you.
So you start dysregulating your, your financial decisions.
So you can make kind of those kinds of mistakes.
The big ones are usually interpersonal,
but when you have that kind of impairment,
it can be a disorder and then you get treated for it.
The vulnerable personality disorders. Fascinating.
That's a fascinating one because you see a lot of them on
social media in particular, right?
You see people that feel like they should be getting more attention than they
are, and don't understand why and feel upset by that. Or shortchanged.
Social media.
Is such a strange beast because it gives everybody the chance to
have a camera and have the audience of a billion people.
So I could go on there and get a billion audience, but I have to earn that.
And so you've lots of people that go look,
I can have a billion people in my audience, but I've, don't have those people.
Why aren't they there who's screw me over and not give you my,
where are my followers? You know, the guy, the other day talking.
About being shadow banned. And he had a thousand friends and I'm like,
are you sure? Yeah. Are you sure your shadow band,
are you sure people are just not interested in what you're.
Saying? Maybe you're just not that interesting, but that's.
The weirdest thing to ever say, like I'm being shadow banned.
Do you have evidence of this? Like, what is, what is happening here?
Why are you kind of a outlaw?
This is not saying the shadow banning is not real,
but like people are using that as an excuse for why they're not getting the D
the attention that they deserve. I.
Would be the next Joe Rogan. If it weren't for those dastardly shadow.
Banners, taking me down, holding me back, they.
Know that they can't silence me. They can't. Yeah.
They, that, if I got out there, I would change the world,
but these guys are holding me back and you can see how that turns into like a
delusional system. If you get, you know,
with sort of more schizophrenia where there's a whole world of people out there
trying to hold me down.
To that, too,
I wanted to ask you if it gets afraid that we might as well get to it right now.
Is there a connection between schizophrenia and narcissism,
because many people who are schizophrenia have these grandiose ideas of who
they are or who they should be,
or where they fit in that are these ridiculously distorted
perceptions of reality.
Yeah, I it's, uh, so grandiosity,
you can see with narcissism, you know, with the, you know,
I have this fantasy about a great am, this illusion,
but it's usually within the scope of reality. So if I'm talking to somebody,
an artist is like, they're like, I'm a 10, I'm pretty honest. And you're like,
not.
Really, man. You're just not you're okay. But like, maybe go back to the gym,
you know, but.
It's usually not, it's not, uh, it's not crazy. Right. Um, I was working in a,
in a hospital with a woman who, who was a patient who said that she worked,
she was the tooth fairy. And she worked for Reagan as the tooth fairy.
I thought, well, that's a grandiose delusion, you know, Reagan wasn't president,
but he was still helping her behind the scenes. That's a grandiose delusion,
but you wouldn't call that narcissistic because she wasn't really,
her personality really narcissistic.
She was more schizophrenia and her presentation kind of flat affect, um,
a little bit strange, odd or unusual, um, uh,
anhedonia is of lack of feeling and stuff. But those weird delusions.
So you can have those grandiose delusions,
but it's not quite the same as narcissism.
It seems to be working a little differently.
And the other place you see them is mania with like bipolar disorder.
People get really manic and they get these manic phases and they're like,
I'm going to do this. I'm going to build this. I'm going to take over this.
My record's going to be the best. And, um,
and that mainly it can look like narcissism too.
And those are probably more closely linked.
Um, w w w D the psychological disorders that we're aware of,
the ones like narcissism, the ones like schizophrenia, like,
do we know what's happening in the mind that causes a distortion of
reality? Is it, is it,
is it ego protecting you from the truth?
Is it a chemical imbalance?
Is it a series of things that all coincide, like when you,
when you have someone who's both a narcissist and possibly schizophrenia.
With narcissism,
it's very hard to detect anything that's sort of clearly biological,
like, uh, uh, and this is true for all personality.
Really it's people have been looking at this last five years,
pretty hard for sort of biomarkers or neural structures. Uh,
you don't really see them very clearly. You do with schizophrenia. There's some,
I was going to say, it's not my area, and I don't want it. I say, Jamie,
if I say anything wrong, just check me and call me out.
Cause I don't want to screw up. Yeah.
Please do that. You know? Cause there's.
That, you know, there's the old stuff about, you know, um,
kind of plaque in the brain and things like with Alzheimer's you see some
missing, uh, neuro structure, but that's just out of my area. Um,
but with personality, you generally don't see it in there.
You just can't find it so far. Um, and when you look at genetics, you, you know,
it's in the genes, but there's no single genes. It's like a swarm.
So it isn't. So if your father is a narcissist,
are you more or less likely to be a narcissist more, more,
but what have you learned from your father? You're like, my God,
my father has ruined his life.
Like many alcoholics have children that won't touch liquor and I've,
I've known quite a few of them.
Yeah. So in the, in the, in the clinical literature,
they talk about that as sort of that identify, you know,
you sort of identify with them or you do the opposite of the father saying the
alcoholic father, like you said, and you you'd be like,
I'm a teetotaler or your father's a narcissist. You become really nice. Yeah.
We don't really see that. What you tend to see. I mean,
I was saying it doesn't happen because they know it happens.
But what you tend to see in the literature with these big family studies is that
traits like narcissism and all personality and really all mental disorders,
they tend to follow family lines. So they're heritable. Um,
but it's not really clear how that happens. So whether it's nurturing nature.
Right? I mean, it's, it's in there, but we.
Don't know exactly what the genes are.
And when they start to look at the nurture question with a lot of personality,
what you find is about,
and there's when they break these down into heredity care coefficients,
they don't mean exactly what they sound, but generally find it's about 50,
60% heritable. You're born with it,
probably genetic and maybe 10% is parenting. And maybe the other 30,
40% is something in the environment. That's just not really clear what it is,
the environment. Yeah. Just random environment. So that's why, you know,
you have kids and if you, you have to, I have two daughters.
They're very different people. Part of that's genetics,
obviously they're very different and all, but it's also their environment.
I might've been a similar parent to both of them,
but there they have different friends. They grew up in a little different time,
a little different culture and all those forces affect you in ways you don't
really understand.
So a lot of what happens to us is this non-shared environment.
We just can't really explain. The parenting is pretty small. Really?
Yeah. It's weird. Um,
what we say about parenting is that it really doesn't make much of a difference,
but it matters. So, so I have, I mean,
I have two daughters and,
and the idea that I could change them into the one end to the other,
through my parenting skills, you know,
I could take my one daughter loves to dance and I could turn her into the one
that loves, you know, math and I can take the math one and.
Turned it into it. Now I couldn't do that in a million years.
They're just different people, no way.
So I can't really shape my kid's personality very well. I mean,
parents just can't really do that, but you matter a lot, you know,
you put food on the table, you, you pride, you know, safe environment.
You're not threatening the kids. You know, you know, there's a lot,
you do as a parent that matters,
but you can't really fine tune your kids' personalities.
Episodes of the Joe Rogan experience are now free on Spotify. That's right.
They're free from September 1st is December 1st.
They're going to be available everywhere. But after December 1st,
they will only be available on Spotify, but they will be free.
That includes the video. The video will also be there. It'll also be free.
That's all we're asking you just go download Spotify much. Buh-bye.